# Introduction-to-Data-Management-and-Statistical-Computing---Final-Project

This marks my first individual project in the UCLA Master of Data Science in Health program. The project involves performing a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to examine differences in the productive hours of various nursing staff at Long-Term Care Facilities in California between 2011-2015. Further statistical testing was included to determine if ownership types of long-term care facilities differed significantly from one another in regard to their operational and staffing strategies. 

For BIOSTAT 203A, Introduction to Data Management and Statistical Computing, I was given the opportunity to select a dataset and an analysis method to perform the following: 
Data cleaning 
Data modeling and visualization 
Statistical testing 
Computational methods in R 

The dataset I selected is titled “Long-Term Care Facility Staffing” from The California Health and Human Services Open Data Portal. It contains 5,589 observations with 15 variables which were collected retrospectively for long-term care facilities in California between 2011-2015. Nominal variables in the dataset include facility numbers, facility names, county names, and the type of control each facility is under, also known as ownership. The year of each observation and the start and end dates of each facility’s data collection, also known as the reporting period, represent temporal interval data. Continuous data include the total patient census days in each long-term care facility, and the total productive hours worked by Nurse Supervisors and Management, Registered Nurses, Licensed Vocational Nurses, Nursing Assistants, Technicians and Specialists, Psychiatric Technicians, and one variable for other nursing staff.

Given differences in ownership type (Governmental, Not-for-Profit, Investor-Owned), the aim of this study was to explore how ownership type influences the productive hours of nursing staff in long-term care facilities in California during 2011-2015. The nursing positions of interest for this analysis were Nurse Supervisors and Management, Registered Nurses, Licensed Vocational Nurses, and Nursing Assistants. 

Methods: 

Prior to performing a PCA, assumptions were checked to determine if the dataset was appropriate for this analysis. The distributions of each of the nursing productive hour variables, which are all continuous variables, were plotted using a histogram to examine if they were normally distributed. This was also visually confirmed by plotting each nursing type’s productive hours using a Q-Q plot to assess normality. The skewed distributions for each nursing type, sorted by ownership type, demonstrated that it was most appropriate to use Spearman’s rank correlation. Performing a Spearman’s rank correlation suggested that strong correlations were present between the productive hours of NAs and LVNs (0.7884086), as well as a strong association between NAs and RNs (0.6315515). This resulted in a Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test to determine if the data was appropriate for a PCA. The result (0.68) suggested that the selected variables were appropriate for a PCA. 

Performing a PCA revealed the two greatest principal components that explain the largest proportion of variance in the dataset. The PCA plot and Component Loadings table illustrated that PC1 was strongly related to direct-care measures, specifically the productive hours of NAs (-0.578), LVNs (-0.555), and RNs (-0.509). PC2 was driven primarily by the productive hours of Nurse Management (-0.949). The combination of PC1 and PC2 explains 81.35% of the variance in the productive hour variables used for PCA, which is considered sufficient for dimensionality reduction. 

Further statistical testing was needed to determine if ownership types differed significantly from one another with principal component scores in mind. The distributions of PC1 and PC2 were examined to determine which statistical test was most appropriate to compare central tendency values between ownership types. Histograms and Q-Q plots of PC1 and PC2 visually demonstrated skewness, resulting in the use of a Kruskal-Wallis test. This yielded significant values for  PC1 (p < 2.2e-16) and PC2 (p < 2.2e-16) which indicated that at least one ownership type had a significantly different median score compared to other ownership categories in PC1 and PC2. This required a pairwise comparison using a Wilcoxon rank sum test to identify which of the ownership types differed significantly.

Results:

Observing the summary scores of PC1, they suggest that Governmental long-term care facilities (-0.1519) were more likely to have higher direct-care productive hours compared to Investor Owned and Not-for-Profit facilities given negative loadings. Not-for-Profit long-term care facilities (0.5652) were the least likely to exhibit high direct-care productivity hours among nursing staff roles in California. Regarding PC2 summary scores, Governmental long-term care facilities appear more likely than other ownership types to exhibit higher management productivity, while Investor Owned facilities were least likely to do so. 

When assessing if ownership types were significantly different from one another in regard to PC1 and PC2, a post-hoc pairwise comparison using Wilcoxon rank sum test was used after statistically significant Kruskal-Wallis findings. With respect to PC1 (direct-care measures), there was a significant difference found between Investor Owned and Not-for-Profit facilities (p < 2e-16). As for PC2, Investor Owned facilities differed significantly from Not-for-Profit facilities (p < 2e-16) and Governmental facilities (p = 0.035). Due to multiple pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum tests performed, p-values were adjusted using the Bonferroni method.

Summary: 

The aim of this study was to examine if ownership types differed in terms of the productive hours of nursing staff roles in California long-term care facilities between 2011-2015. Performing a PCA revealed that Governmental facilities were more likely to exhibit greater productive working hours in both direct-care services and management responsibilities. Not-for-Profit facilities demonstrated the weakest association with higher direct-care productive hours. Additional statistical testing revealed that ownership types also significantly differed from one another, where Not-for-Profit facilities and Investor Owned facilities differed significantly in regard to direct-care productive hours. Additionally, Investor Owned facilities differed significantly compared to both Governmental and Not-for-Profit facilities in terms of management productivity. This exploratory study suggests that ownership type may be associated with distinct staffing patterns, which could ultimately result in differences in resident care quality and workforce sustainability. 
